ऐतरेय शंकरभाष्य

सः कर्म अपरब्रह्म-विषय-विज्ञानेन परिसमाप्तं | स एष कर्मणो ज्ञानसहितस्य परा गतिः उक्था-विज्ञान-द्वारेण उपसंह्रुता | ‘एतत् सत्यं ब्रह्म प्राणाख्यं’ ऐ आ २-१-५  ‘एष एको देवः एतस्य एव प्राणस्य सर्वे देवा विभूतयः’ ऐ आ २-१-७ ‘एतस्य प्राणस्य आत्मभावं गच्छन् देवता आप्येति’ ऐ आ २-२-४ इति उक्तं |

There the discussion ended with karma which is the vijnana of aparabrahma। That karma which combined with Jnana was concluded with the uktha-vijnana (sukta-s and stotra-s mentioned in the previous sections)।

Then these citations in the earlier sections ‘ ‘Brahma-satya is also called as Prana’, ‘He (Prana) is the only Deva, all Deva-s are manifestations of Prana’, ‘One who realizes this nature of this Prana, gets the Deva status’

स अयं देवताप्यलक्षणः पर पुरुषार्थः | एष मोक्षः | स च अयं यथोक्तेन ज्ञान-कर्म-समुच्चयेन साधनेन प्राप्तव्यः | न अतः परम् अस्ति ‘ इति एके प्रतिपन्नाः | तान् निराचिकीस्र्षुः उत्तरं केवल आत्मज्ञान-विधानार्थं ‘आत्मा वा इदं’ (ऐ आ २-४-१) इत्यादि आह |

That one will resolve into Deva is the parama-purushaartha। This is Moksha (liberation)। This is to be attained by the jnana-karma-samuccaya as described before। Some say - there is nothing beyond (or better) than this। To respond and negate those arguments, it is said later (other texts) that ‘Only this is Atma’।

 

कथं पुनः ग्रंथः अकर्मसंबंधी-केवल-आत्म-विज्ञान-विधानार्थ उत्तरः इति गम्यते? So, how is it known that the following text has no bearing on karma, but only on atma-jnaana?

अन्यार्थ-अनवगमात् | Because ‘ there can be no other meaning coming from the following text।

तथा च पूर्व-उक्तानां देतानां अग्नि-आदीनां संसारित्वं दर्शयिष्यति अशनादि-दोशत्वेन That was also said before that ‘Agni and other Deva-s, experiencing hunger, thirst etc are considered samsari-s’, ‘तं अशनापिपासाभां अन्ववार्जत्’ ऐ आ २/४/२। इत्यादिना | ‘He was devolved of the hunger, thirst etc and then sent’ and such statements।

अशायादिमत् सर्वं संसार एव | परस्य तु ब्रह्मणो-अशनायादि इति श्रुतेः |  Thus, with hunger, thirst etc is samsara, since the scriptures continue to say - Para-Brahma is alone the one without any hunger, thirst etc।  Br।A। 3-5-1।  

 

भवतु एवं केवल आत्मज्ञानं मोक्षसाधनम् | Thus, aatmajnaana without the dependence of karma is the path to moksha। न तु अत्र अकर्मी एव अधिक्रियते | But, it does not say one has to renounce karma (sanyasi) is the adhikari। विशेष अश्रवणात् | Because no where in shruti does it say so explicitly।  अकर्मिण अंतरस्य आश्रमि इह अश्रवणात् | Also, it is nowhere said that one should belong to another ashrama। कर्म च ब्रुहती-सहस्र-लक्षणं प्रस्त्युत्य अनंतरं एव आत्मज्ञानं प्रारभ्यते | After having said about bruhati-sahasra (a collection of sukta-s, 36000 syllables, as part of Mahavrata) only is the lesson about atma-jnaana।  तस्मात् कर्मी एव अधिक्रियते | So, only the karmee is the adhikari for atma-jnaana।  

न च कर्म असंबंधी आत्मविज्ञानं | It is not right that atma-jnana is not depending on karma। पूर्ववदंते उपसंहारात् | Like said before and concluded।

यथा कर्मसंबंधिनः पुरुषस्य सूर्यात्मनः स्थावरजंगमादि सर्वप्राणि आत्मत्वमुक्तं From what is said that all movable and immovable life objects have the karma-master Surya is the Atma,  ब्राह्मणेन मंत्रेण च ‘सूर्य आत्मा’, इत्यादिना and in the Brahmana-s and Mantra-s it is said Surya is the Atma, तथैव ‘एय्स ब्रहैष इंद्रः’ इत्यादि उपक्रम्य Also it is said ‘This is Brahma, This is Indra’ and concluded, सर्वप्राण्यात्मत्वं ‘यच्च स्थावरं सर्वं तत् प्रज्नानेत्रम् | All that is movable and immovable lifes have Prajnana as their eyes, इति उपसहरिष्यति |

 तथा च संहितोपनिषदि ‘एवं हि एव बह्वृचा महात्युक्थे मीमांसंते’ इत्यादिना In the Samhitopanishad, it is said ‘It is Him that RgVeda chanters praise in the sukta-s,

 कर्मसंबधित्वं उक्त्वा thus after speaking about karma dependence

‘सर्वेषु भूतेषु इतमेव ब्रह्मेत्याचक्षते’ इति उपसंहरति | concluding that in all live beings, He is the Brahma

तथा तस्यैव ‘योऽयं अयं शरीरः प्रज्ञात्मा’ इति उक्तस्य that consciousness with no body is the core of the entire being (प्राण)

‘यश्च असावादित्य एकमेव तदिति विद्यात्’ इति एकत्वं उक्तं | it should be known that the essence of even the Aditya, they are the same

इहापि ‘कोयमात्मा’ इति उपक्रम्य प्रज्ञात्मत्वं एव ‘प्रज्ञानं ब्रह्म’ इति दर्शयति | here also, to the question ‘Who is Atma’ in the end it is said Consciousness is Brahma, he is called prajna-atma

तस्मात् न अकर्मसंबधि आत्मज्ञानम् | From all of these, it cannot be said that atma-jnana is not karma-dependent।

पुनः उक्त्या आनर्थक्यं इति चेत् | Then the repetition (in the following sections) is meaningless।

कथं? In what manner? 

‘प्राणो वा अहमस्मि ऋषे’ इत्यादिब्राह्मणेन ‘Hey Rishi, I am Prana’ as said in the Brahmana

‘सूर्य आत्मा’ इति च मंत्रेण  निर्धारितस्य  आत्मनः Atma as established by ‘Surya is the Atma’ from sayings in the samhita, aranyaka

‘आत्मा वा इदं’ इत्यादि ब्राह्मणेन and, ‘this was Atma’ in the Aranyaka, 

‘कोऽयं आत्मा’ इति प्रश्नपूर्वकं ‘who is Atma’ question asked again before this discussion

पुनर्निर्धारणं पुनरुक्तं अनर्थकं इति चेत् | Can it be said that it is repeated and re-established and thus not meaningful?

न | Not so। The response follows।

तस्यैव धर्मांतर विशेष निर्धारणार्थत्त्वात् न पुनरुक्तिदोषः | because the same reflection and meditation for determination of the differentiation for Dharma

कथं? How is it so?

तस्यैव कर्मसंबंधिनः जगत्-सृष्टि-स्तिथि-संहारादि धर्मविशेष निर्धारणार्थत्वात् | for the determination of the involvement of Atma in the cosmos creation, sustainence and dissolution and such dharma matters

केवल उपास्त्यर्थत्वात् वा | or may be just for the sake of upasana ‘ where not importantly of jnana

अथवा ‘आत्मा’ इत्यादिः परो ग्रंथसंधर्भः or Atma and such titles in other text contexts आत्मनः कर्मिणः कर्मणः अन्यत्र उपासनाप्राप्तौ only karma has to be the object for a karmee, not atma कर्मप्रस्तावे अविहितत्वात् केवल उप्यात्मा उपास्यः इत्यमेवं अर्थः | also, in the context of karma, only the Atma can be object of upasana without the karma-bondage

भेधाभेद उपास्यत्वाद्त् वा | or perhaps upasana with the understanding of bheda-abheda,

एक एवात्मा कर्मविषये भेधा-दृष्तिभाक् | Only the singular Atma may be differentiated in karma topics

स एव अकर्मकाले अभेदीन अपि उपास्यः इति | even when one is not involved in Karma, one can be Atma upasaka

एवं अपुनरुक्तता | thus there is no repetitiveness।

 

कर्म-ज्ञान-समुच्चय श्रुति-विहित

‘विद्यां चाविद्यां च यः तत् वेदोभयं सह | अविद्यया मृत्युं तीर्त्वा विद्यया अमृतं अश्नुते’, he who worships both Vidya and Avidya together, he will pass mortality by avidya and immortality by Vidya। 

‘कुर्वन्नेवेह कर्माणि जिजीवेत् शतगं समाः’ while doing Karma alongside, one has to live a hundred years here alone

इति वाजिनां | so say the scriptures। वाजि = श्रुति

न च वर्षशतात् परम् आयुः मर्त्यानां येन कर्मपरित्यागेन आत्मानं उपासीत | mortals don’t have more than one hundred years, so they could worshipped atma having given up karma।  

दर्शितं च ‘तावंति पुरुष आयुषो अह्नां सहस्राणि भवंति’ इति It was also seen that ‘ to that person there will be that many thousand years |

वर्षशतं च आयुः कर्मणैव व्याप्तं hundred years of life is also attained by karma alone |

दर्शितश्च मंत्रः ‘कुर्वन्नेवेह कर्माणि’ इत्यादि In the mantra it was said before ‘ ‘by performing karma etc’ |

तथा ‘यावज्जीवं अग्निहोत्रं जुहोति’, ‘यावज्जीवं दर्शपूर्णमासाभ्यां यजेत’ इत्यादिश्च | should do agnihotra as long one lives, should do darshapurnamasa yajna as long as one lives ‘ this is also said in the shruti-s

‘तं यज्ञपात्रैः दहंति’ इति च | and ‘One should be consumed like the offerings in the yajna’

ऋणत्रय श्रुतेश्च | shruti-s also tell us about rina-traya (देव, ऋषि, पितृ) त्तै। सं।

तत्र पारिव्राज्यादिशास्त्रं ‘व्युत्थायाथ भिक्षाचर्यं चरंति’ बृ। उ। इति आत्मज्नानस्तुतिपर अर्थवादो अनधिक्रुतार्थो वा || in the texts it is prescribed about सन्यास that ‘thus, leaving behind the wants/likes of life, one does the भिक्ष | Is this glorifying atma-jnana or is it meant for undeserving karmi-s?   
